---
layout: post
title: "“Operación Gedeón”"
subtitle: "The failed plot to attract a significant amount of media attention"
author: Jane Doe
date: 2020-08-06 16:11:59 +0200
categories: home blog
image: images/image 03.png
image-credits: Jane Doe
tags: 
 - Happening 
 - Stadsmarketing

---
Earlier this week, [we wrote about](https://www.bellingcat.com/news/2020/05/05/the-invasion-of-venezuela-brought-to-you-by-silvercorp-usa/) “Operación Gedeón”, a surreal and ultimately doomed military operation conducted by Silvercorp USA and a group of Venezuelan expatriates with the aim of instigating a nationwide rebellion against the government and capturing its high-ranking members, including President Maduro himself. 

The failed plot has attracted a significant amount of media attention, with outlets like Vice reporting that Airan Berry, one of the two U.S. citizens involved in the raid currently in custody in Venezuela, [“appears to be really into QAnon”](https://www.vice.com/en_ca/article/qj4dvd/captured-american-mercenary-appears-to-be-really-into-qanon). The Venezuelan authorities aired his confession video earlier today, in which he said that his mission was to seize an airport tower and other targets in Caracas, including the Miraflores Palace (a Venezuelan media outlet reported that Berry was referencing the tower at the Simon Bolivar International Airport, which is outside of Caracas, but this is not clear from Berry’s video confession. Given the nature of the operation, and another reference by Berry in his confession video to being tasked with securing the La Carlota airport airstrip in Caracas, it is likely that this is the airport that he meant). Luke Denman, the other U.S. citizen in custody, appeared in a “heavily edited” confession video yesterday and may have been telegraphing through eye movements that he was being coerced into implicating Trump in the plot (you can watch Luke’s video [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kcUC6k3vjQw&feature=youtu.be)). 

{% include image.html url="/images/image.jpg" description="Image credits: Jane Doe" %}

Since our earlier publication, more details have come to light about Silvercorp USA’s involvement in the plot, mainly via the Washington Post publishing a contract between the company and signed by high-ranking members of the Venezuelan opposition (but not its leader, Juan Guaido). This contract outlines, among other matters, the operational parameters of the Silvercorp USA mercenary force during its mission in Venezuela. The authenticity of the document was verified by both the Washington Post, which published it, as well as one of its signatories, a man named J.J. Rendón. 

## Some Contract Revelations

Last night, the Washington Post published a 41-page document outlining the parameters of the agreement with Silvercorp USA. The document includes sections defining the rules of engagement, definitions of hostile forces, and how to handle the capture of Venezuelan citizens during the operation.