---
layout: post
title: "Panorama Rotterdam"
subtitle: "The most advanced apparatus of the Rotterdam city marketing campaign."
categories:
image: images/posts/panorama-rotterdam/pr-01.jpg
tags:
 - Depot
 - Architectuur
 - Stadsmarketing

---
# The Depot is real. It stands there, in Museum Park. It is built with many thousands of pounds of steel and concrete. Inside is the entire Boijmans collection, accessible to the public. But the most image-defining aspect is without doubt the mirror, with its reflection of the Rotterdam skyline.

The exterior of the building is so imposing that it has been given its own name. _Panorama Rotterdam_ is what Boijmans director Sjarel Ex proudly calls it. A reference to the famous Panorama Mesdag in The Hague:

"Until the nineteenth century, the Panorama was shown at fairs, a traveling phenomenon, almost real, as if you had been there. Panorama Mesdag, a 360 degree view around Scheveningen, is also something from those days. We are descended from that, with Panorama Rotterdam. Inverted and of our time".

The panorama was a circular, inward-facing painting in 360 degrees, conceived to give visitors the most real experience possible of a historical scene. Over a period of a century, the type underwent several innovations to make the effect as impressive as possible: entire buildings were eventually constructed for it. Because of the high investment costs, the realization and operation usually lay in the hands of the wealthy bourgeoisie, who had the habit of giving the scene an educational character, so that the masses could not only be entertained but also enriched.

Panorama Rotterdam, inverted and of our time', is the postmodern version of the panorama. Not a painting, but a projection screen, a television (literally: far off-view). The mirror is both the camera that captures the scene and the screen that shows it, with the result that the viewers themselves appear in the picture. This tableau also tells a specific story: the story of Rotterdam as a proud high-rise city.

The design has been conceived in such a way that you can look at the skyline of Rotterdam from the street. In that respect it could not have come at a better location; right in the centre of Rotterdam's high-rise buildings. Thanks to its double-curved shape, the buildings appear more slender and taller. Moreover, you can not only see the entire skyline at a glance, but also see yourself in the foreground. It goes without saying that this is now Rotterdam's ultimate selfie hotspot. According to MVRDV's architect Winnie Maas you can even take a _selfie 2.0_ here. The innovation lies in the vastness and versatility of the image.

No expense was spared to make the experience as impressive as possible. The fact that the building has been financed by a public-private partnership between the municipality, Museum Boijmans and the philanthropic Stichting de Verre Bergen also supports Sjarel's comparison. These Rotterdam-rooted organizations benefit from proud city dwellers. 'And if there's anything Rotterdammers are proud of, it's that skyline,' building and housing alderman Bas Kurvers says in an [interview](https://www.boijmans.nl/en/the-depot-is-part-of-rotterdam-s-skyline) on the Boijmans website.

The alderman isn't wrong. Rotterdam is said to be the only real city in the Netherlands, thanks to its skyline. The skyline has replaced the harbor as the main object of the local chauvinism. At the international website [_SkyscraperForum.com_](https://www.skyscrapercity.com/forums/rotterdam.385/), the Rotterdam section is as large as those of the other four major Dutch cities combined. This is where high-rise fanatics meet to discuss the latest building developments. With more than 4,000 posts, the Depot counts as one of the most popular discussions. 'Mirror, mirror on the wall, who has the most beautiful skyline of them all?', writes user Modular. 'This building has a rare quality: the more construction goes on elsewhere in the city, the more beautiful this thing becomes!' writes GrijzePilion.

And there definitely is construction elsewhere in the city. It is hard to keep up with the number of high-rise projects, with more than fifteen towers in the pipeline higher than 100 meters, three of which even exceed 200 meters. In 2018, the alderman raised the high-rise limit from 200 to 250 meters, at which point Rotterdam could again call itself the city with the highest tower in the Benelux. If it were up to the alderman and the developers of RISE, the Zalmhaven Tower would probably have to relinquish that title in a few years. But in order for that to happen, first the social housing of the Pompenburgflat will have to be demolished.

Those familiar with the history of Rotterdam know that the promise of a modern metropolis has often been used by local authorities to create public support for drastic urban transformations. In her book _Imagine a Metropolis_, Patricia van Ulzen shows in detail how this happened in the interwar years, during the reconstruction period, and in the early 1990s, during the transition from industrial port city to post-industrial innovation city. _Manhattan at the Maas_ was the political aspiration at the time. The transition to yuppie city is still not quite completed, but today we are approaching a turnaround, and not to everyone's benefit. Is the dream of a modern metropolis still the means of keeping the population satisfied?

With the abandonment of the _World Port World City_ slogan in 2013, the explicit, metropolitan ambitions also seemed to have disappeared. Marketeers were probably done with having to disappoint visitors; after all, the brand 'world city' creates certain expectations. Since then, a different path has been taken. Today the city is deliberately positioned as a process, a city that is always on the move, a place where _it_ happens. In short, the city of permanent change. But this story, too, eventually conforms to the big city narrative, of which the skyline is the universal icon. In that respect, the mirror in the Museum Park is the perfect metaphor for the city slogan **ROTTERDAM. MAKE IT HAPPEN.**: a potential void in service of polished, metropolitan images.

'Our actions are the only mirror in which we can see what we are,' a historian once wrote. Rotterdam looks at the city in the mirror, trying to see itself. But the icon of the skyline is an abstraction; it shows an indirect experience of the city—a _representation_. Just as people flocked to Panorama Mesdag in the nineteenth century for an enchanting _simulation_ of the Scheveningen beach (while the real beach is a fifteen-minute bike ride away), today people come to the cultural heart of Rotterdam for an impressive image of the high-rise city of the Netherlands. Many people prefer this ideal image to the _real deal_ in all its messiness, with all its flaws. Here the city is what it actually is for many; an image of the city.

Panorama Mesdag gave visitors an impression of the Scheveningen coast as timeless, harmonious and cultivated nature. As such, it served to glorify a bourgeois view of the world as prevalent among the middle class at the time. Panorama Rotterdam also serves to promote a certain lifestyle, but the _urban lifestyle_ can no longer be captured in demarcated morals and values. More than educating the population, today it is about _activating_ their creative potential. _You_ **MAKE IT HAPPEN.** Both Rotterdam's city promoters and the Depot's creators understand this. On the big screen, _Great Rotterdam_ is broadcast, but the show is interactive; the audience plays an important role. Every selfie on social media contributes to an unending stream of promotional material, which in time leads to the further production of the skyline. This is the most advanced device of Rotterdam city marketing.